README.md, before:


# Data Lake 
## Udacity Data Engineer Nanodegree - Project 4

Sparkify has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

This project entails building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:

* `song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json`
* `song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

## Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

* `log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json`
* `log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

Below is an example of what the data in a log file, `2018-11-12-events.json`, looks like.
![log data](log-data.png)

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table

table name: `songplays` 

description: records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong` 

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`songplay_id`| monotonically_increasing_id|unique identifier for songplay
`start_time`| timestamp| TODO
`user_id`| integer | TODO
`level`| varchar | TODO
`song_id`| varchar| TODO
`artist_id`| varchar| TODO
`session_id`| integer| TODO
`location`| varchar| TODO
`user_agent`| varchar| TODO

### Dimension Tables
`users` - users in the app

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`user_id`|integer|TODO
`first_name`|varchar|TODO
`last_name`|varchar|TODO
`gender`|varchar|TODO
`level`|varchar|TODO

`songs` - songs in music database

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`song_id`|varchar|TODO
`title`|varchar|TODO
`artist_id`|varchar|TODO
`year`|varchar|TODO
`duration`|varchar|TODO

`artists` - artists in music database

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`artist_id`|varchar|TODO
`name`|varchar|TODO
`location`|varchar|TODO
`latitude`|varchar|TODO
`longitude`|varchar|TODO

`time` - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`start_time`| integer | TODO
`hour`| integer | TODO
`day`| integer | TODO
`week`| integer | TODO
`month`| integer | TODO
`year`| integer | TODO
`weekday`| integer | TODO


## Rationale for schema design
`users`: there should be a unique row per user, with no duplicate rows. It's possible that a user shows up in both the free and paid tiers, but these are not considered duplicates.

`songs`: duplicates are dropped here as well as they don't convey any additional useful information. We don't need multiple rows for the same song.

`artists`: same thing as songs

`time`: not sure what the purpose of this table has been throughout these projects, but this is just a list of date parts for each songplay from the log events. Duplicates are not dropped here, as multiple users may listen at the same time. That said, there's nothing intrinsic to this table alone that gives any meaning to any of the timestamps, whether or not they are duplicates.

`songplays`: These are log events where the page column of the event is equal to `NextSong`. These pages indicate a discrete songplay. Duplicates are dropped if they exist.

## ETL explanation
The job reads in a config file to get the AWS credentials and target S3 bucket. From there, it creates a `SparkSession`, reads song data and log events from a destination bucket. It does a number of transformations to get the appropriate dataframe structures, and writes to the target bucket.

Commit message:

addressing project feedback on duplicate conditions
drop rows where there are any duplicate column values for the specified
columns. the old behavior only dropped entire rows that were duplicate

README.md, after:


# Data Lake 
## Udacity Data Engineer Nanodegree - Project 4

Sparkify has grown their user base and song database even more and want to move their data warehouse to a data lake. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

This project entails building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, processes them using Spark, and loads the data back into S3 as a set of dimensional tables. This will allow their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to.

## Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset:

* `song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json`
* `song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

## Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

* `log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json`
* `log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

Below is an example of what the data in a log file, `2018-11-12-events.json`, looks like.
![log data](log-data.png)

## Schema for Song Play Analysis
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables.

### Fact Table

table name: `songplays` 

description: records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page `NextSong` 

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`songplay_id`| monotonically_increasing_id|unique identifier for songplay
`start_time`| timestamp| TODO
`user_id`| integer | TODO
`level`| varchar | TODO
`song_id`| varchar| TODO
`artist_id`| varchar| TODO
`session_id`| integer| TODO
`location`| varchar| TODO
`user_agent`| varchar| TODO

### Dimension Tables
`users` - users in the app

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`user_id`|integer|TODO
`first_name`|varchar|TODO
`last_name`|varchar|TODO
`gender`|varchar|TODO
`level`|varchar|TODO

`songs` - songs in music database

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`song_id`|varchar|TODO
`title`|varchar|TODO
`artist_id`|varchar|TODO
`year`|varchar|TODO
`duration`|varchar|TODO

`artists` - artists in music database

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`artist_id`|varchar|TODO
`name`|varchar|TODO
`location`|varchar|TODO
`latitude`|varchar|TODO
`longitude`|varchar|TODO

`time` - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units

|column|type|description|
|---|---|---|
`start_time`| integer | TODO
`hour`| integer | TODO
`day`| integer | TODO
`week`| integer | TODO
`month`| integer | TODO
`year`| integer | TODO
`weekday`| integer | TODO


## Rationale for schema design
`users`: there should be a unique row per user, with no duplicates for `user_id`. It's possible that a user shows up in both the free and paid tiers, but these are not considered duplicates.

`songs`: duplicates on `song_id` are dropped here as well as they don't convey any additional useful information. We don't need multiple rows for the same song.

`artists`: same thing as songs, drop any duplicate `artist_id`

`time`: not sure what the purpose of this table has been throughout these projects, but this is just a list of date parts for each songplay from the log events. Duplicates are not dropped here, as multiple users may listen at the same time. That said, there's nothing intrinsic to this table alone that gives any meaning to any of the timestamps, whether or not they are duplicates.

`songplays`: These are log events where the page column of the event is equal to `NextSong`. These pages indicate a discrete songplay. Duplicates are dropped for the column `start_time` are dropped if they exist.

## ETL explanation
The job reads in a config file to get the AWS credentials and target S3 bucket. From there, it creates a `SparkSession`, reads song data and log events from a destination bucket. It does a number of transformations to get the appropriate dataframe structures, and writes to the target bucket.
